# NY-property-unsupervised-fraud-detection
The purpose of this project is to look for anomalies among property records in the “Property Valuation and Assessment Data” file using unsupervised models and find out potential fraudulent properties through investigating further on the top ten most possible properties to have committed property tax frauds and researching on reasons that these properties turn out to be anomalous and therefore detected in the models.
The “Property Valuation and Assessment Data”  file is a real estate assessment property dataset that consists of properties located in New York City. The document is mainly used to calculate property tax and grant eligibility to the properties that qualify for exemptions and/or abatements. The file is updated annually and collected and entered by the City employees such as property assessors and property tax specialists. The properties in the file were assessed in November 2010 and were from 5 main areas including Manhattan, Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. 
The report begins with a detailed description of the dataset. The full data quality assessment is included as an appendix of this report. As for the size of the file, the dataset has 32 fields, including both numerical and categorical fields, and 1,070,994 records. Among the 32 fields, 14 of them are numerical fields while 18 are categorical.
Followed by the description of data and distributions, the report explains how each numerical variable has been cleaned and filled in for missing values and zero values. We also included an additional 45 variables we calculated and utilized in the model. All data used are then converted into z scores in order to be compared on the same scale. Principal component analysis (PCA) is performed after the conversion to remove correlations, and dimensions are set to be reduced to six, by our choice. Then the six dimensions are again z-scaled, ready to be used for the models.
As for the detection process, we used two methods to select anomalous properties. The first method, heuristic algorithm, calculates the distance of z-scale from the origin. The second method is the autoencoder. Both methods give a score for each record where a higher score indicates a more abnormal record. We decided to combine the two methods by giving their ranks equal weight, 50%,  to generate a combined score with quantile binning.
Based on the new combined score, we selected the top ten properties with the highest anomaly score to further investigate. Through further research, some properties have reasonable explanations such as government properties for high anomaly scores. From a conservative point of view to prevent frauds, there are still six properties that seem suspicious after research and therefore worth more professional investigation for potential property tax frauds.  
